autoscale: true

# Reading and Doing Ethnography

### Social Anthropology 314

---

# 1.3 Research Project Workshop

---

# Class research projects

Submit a 1-paragraph statement of your project. Explain briefly:

- What site you want to work on;
- Why you are interested in the site;
- Whether you have any existing relationship to the site, and if so what; and
- An anthropological research question about your site.

---

# What makes a good class project

- You can get access to the site.
- Low risks to you and to the research participants.
- You are truly interested in your site.

---

# What is a risk?

- There are risks to you as well as risks to your research participants.
- Exposing private information can pose a risk.
- Breaking confidentiality can pose a risk.
- Knowledge of illicit behavior, e.g. criminality, poses a risk.
- Confidential health information (e.g. psychiatric diagnoses) can pose risks.

---

## What makes a **good** research question?

---

# Good research questions

- Address a puzzle.
- Clearly and precisely stated.
- Answerable with the tools and resources available.
- Relevant: other people care about the answer.
- Don't smuggle in gratuitous opinions of your own.

---

## Are all research questions good?

---

# Research questions that need work

- Why are men different from women? *Impossibly broad, no clear site.*
- Do Americans believe in destiny? *Too broad, factual, no clear puzzle.*
- Why do poor Americans vote against their economic interests? *This implies that you know what their interests are, prior to doing research.*
- How can ethnography can illuminate gender dynamics? *Nebulous, no clear site.*

---

# Research questions that need work

- How are prices different at a farmers' market than in a supermarket?
- What is the physical layout of a (particular) bookstore?
- What attracts people to interfaith church services?

---

# Good research questions

- What does the word "oriental" mean to staff and visitors at an Oriental Institute?
- In a tense rural environment, how do recreational rock climbers perceive those outside their group?
- In a science museum, how are children are taught to recognize what counts as "science"?

---

## Good research questions often *begin with a site.*

### Then they ask a question about something *within that site*.

---

## You can self-generate a good question

- What is something that frustrates you?
- What is something that you can't make sense of?
- What is something that seems like it shouldn't happen?
- What is a social situation that seems mysterious to you?
- What's a social phenomenon that's hypocritical or contradictory?

These can lead you into a good research question.

---

## Culture is about meaningful action

### Thus, good research questions explore the *local meaning of some phenomenon*.

---

## Research questions are not supposed to be finished or perfect. They're just a moment in a process.
