autoscale: true

# 6.3 Critique as a Practice

### Reading and Doing Ethnography
### Social Anthropology 314

---

# Let's talk about how critical discourse forms.

---

## Questions to ask about critical discourse

- Who is speaking?
- To whom are they speaking?
- In what kind of social context?
- What gives someone the right to speak?

---

## Feminist inconsistencies 

> A man that dated my best friend claimed to be a feminist and someone who respected women, but after they broke up, he spread rumours about her, slut-shamed her, and tried to make her out to be a "crazy ex-girlfriend." This type of behaviour was inconsistent with his self-professed "feminist" views.

---

## Feminist inconsistencies 

> A girl/friend proclaimed to practice feminist rituals and as such vowed to or proclaimed to not add any damaging hair products or apply heat to her hair and after a week did the opposite.

---

## Feminist inconsistencies

> A friend of mine claims to be a feminist and very motivated by being a strong woman. But she went almost crazy knowing that she did not have a date on Valentine's day. And even commented on a very embarrassing public display of affection by saying "At least she has someone on Valentine's day."

---

## Christian inconsistencies

> He claims to be selfless but he forgets to serve those who are not Christian. Despite those very people serving him too.

---

## Christian inconsistencies

> A girl I knew in high school preached Christianity and with accordance to this not drinking, partying, smoking etc. But over weekends when I would go out to clubs with friends I would see this girl on the dance floor with a beer in her hand.

---

## Critique of institutions

> [Powerless] Having to attend prayers at school when I did not want to & if I did not attend it, I would get into trouble therefore feeling powerless, because I wasn't in control, and my school (institution) was.

---

## Critique of institutions

> Boys complained at school that they could not have long hair, and made a petition, and everyone grew their hair (hiding it with hairbands/hats) but because it was going against school rules, the school brought in a barber to cut the boys' hair.

---

## Critique of anthropology

> During all our Anthropology classes. You voice your opinion and suggestions, but the lecturer and tutor give vague responses and does not aid your development in writing. This course is very frustrating because nothing is ever clear and the classes are a complete waste of time.

---

## This week's assignment

Please submit fieldnotes about a form of critique or protest you observe at your fieldsite. You should write between 350 and 500 words. Explain briefly **what the critique is, what motivates people to make it, how it is expressed, and how it is received**.